There's a feud between Iran and the West
that’s spanned coups, sanctions and standoffs.
“The world's number one state sponsor of terror.”
“Covert operation to overthrow Mossadegh.”
“A Shah who had fled to Rome, comes home.”
“Hundreds of thousands take to the streets.”
“1979 turned everything upside down.”
But it didn't start in 1979.
Or with Mossadegh, or even with Iran.
“The largest empire the world had ever seen.”
It goes back
over 2000 years to the Persian Empire.
That's where we find one of the oldest stories
ever told.
The battle of good versus evil
“Erased from history.”
Of freedom versus tyranny.
Of valiant West versus despotic East.
“And it’s the victors who write the history books.”
“The thousand nations of the Persian Empire
descend upon you.”
This origin story helps us
understand what has been unfolding
for the past century, continuing into today.
So if you want to understand
why the West hates Persia,
first you have to understand
why it worships Greece.
“The finest soldiers the world has ever known.”
Hi everyone, it’s Tala.
Before we dive deeper, we want to give a special
thank you to our supporters on Patreon.
Doing this work takes time,
resources, and editorial independence,
so it's wouldn't be possible
without our supporters online.
If you believe in what we're doing
and want to be a part of this with us,
you can join our Patreon.
It's how we keep this going.
Now back to the video.
[Chapter I: The Heroes]
“A people glorious and arrogant.
Valiant and headstrong.”
“No other city has shaped the Western world
so much as Athens”
In Western culture
Ancient Greece is seen as the cradle
of philosophy, science,
and most importantly,
as the birthplace of democracy.
Entire university departments
are dedicated to this era, called the ‘classics’
a name fitting for
how these contributions are seen:
as classic, foundational.
That's because the West sees
ancient Greece
and Rome
as the birthplaces of Western civilization.
Not only are you getting
a better understanding of Greece
and Western culture,
but you're also sending a signal
of the continuity
that exists
between what happened here
and what happened with our founding fathers.
This first happened over 300 years ago
during the Renaissance,
when there was a rebirth of interest
in ancient Greek art,
literature, philosophy and science
after the so-called Dark Ages.
Fun fact this rebirth was possible
because ancient Greek texts
had been preserved in Arabic.
“Translate these books as soon as possible.”
Their translation into Latin
made them accessible
to Latin Europe, prompting the Renaissance.
Then came the enlightenment,
where the thinkers of the time
were reading and inspired
by the works of ancient Greece,
and saw themselves
as inheriting
the legacy of Greek reason, logic and inquiry.
Athenian democracy
was a symbolic ancestor for new ideas of liberty
and citizenship.
Ancient Greece became more than history.
It became an origin story.
The birthplace of Western civilization.
Aristotle is called the father of logic,
Socrates and Plato.
Fathers of philosophy.
But most important for this story.
Herodotus: the father of history,
who is considered
to have written the first major
work of historical prose in Western literature,
so that the great and marvelous
deeds of Greeks and barbarians
should not go unsung.
And it's the history
he recorded that would echo through
Western thought for centuries.
The history of the heroic Greeks
“The world will know that free men
stood against a tyrant,”
against their enemy:
“Embrace me as your king and as your God”
The Persians.
“Yes!”
[Chapter II: The Villains]
“No Greek would even hear the word Persian
without terror.”
“Hundreds of peoples and tribes
were forced to accept Persian rule
and submit to a despotic regime.”
The Persian Empire and Greek city states
fought many battles
during a time known as the Greco-Persian Wars
like Marathon, Salamis and Thermopylae,
which you might know from the movie 300.
“This is where we hold them!”
and he wrote about them
not as messy geopolitical struggles,
but as moral epics.
The Greeks were the free and brave underdogs,
fighting for liberty
against the barbaric and cruel Persian monarchs.
In his writings,
Herodotus helped birth
the idea of the tyrannical, despotic East.
The tiny state of democratic
Athens was gaining power.
This was a threat,
that the Persians would have to destroy.
“The Athenians
slaughtered over 6000 Persians
in one fateful day.
The world's first democracy had survived
its first great test.”
Fast forward 2000 years to the Renaissance,
and the reading of his work
coincided with another major chapter
in Western European history.
The discovery of new parts of the world
new peoples
peoples we know they would come to see
as barbaric.
And that framing never really died.
In a way
he's the father of history
and of the epic war between the civilized
and the barbarians.
“Without their success in this conflict,
they would, no doubt, never have
had the liberty, means,
or conviction
to invent, discover or create all they did.
Indeed,
most of the cornerstones of modern civilization.”
The problem is that this whole story
gets a lot wrong.
“Herodotus’ account of the past
seems burdened with much invented history.”
“Almost everything that we know
about the Persian Empire
actually comes from Greek sources.
So it was written by the enemies.”
[Chapter III: The ‘Villains’]
Here's the reality.
“The greatest empire the world had ever seen.”
The Persian Empire
began with the Achaemenid Empire
and was founded by Kourosh or Cyrus the Great.
It was the largest
the world had seen, stretching
from Libya to India
and home to nearly half the world's population.
But unlike other empires,
it thrived on tolerance.
“And it shows the different peoples of the empire
bringing their different tributes.
And the Persian Empire
unlike others,
didn't try to crush people
into one way of being or doing.
It allowed a great diversity of habits
and patterns, language and faith
to live together.
It became the great model
of how to run an empire of dizzying diversity.”
The Cyrus Cylinder guaranteed people
the right to worship freely
speak their own languages,
and return to their homelands.
And it's often called the first Bill of rights
written in 539 B.C.
Cyrus even funded the rebuilding
of the Jewish Temple in Jerusalem,
earning him praise in the Hebrew Bible.
Later, King Daryoosh (Darius the Great)
would expand this legacy
building roads, standardizing currency,
and creating an administrative system
so advanced it became a model for future empires.
Although Cyrus’ Empire was eventually broken up
the idea of Cyrus himself remained:
Cyrus as the model ruler.
The principal source
for that view of Cyrus came from the Greek
historian Xenophon.
His book Cyropaedia
was really about how to run an empire,
with Cyrus as the model.”
Historians and philosophers considered this work
a masterpiece.
It was also read by Alexander
the Great, Julius Caesar.
“It was very popular all through the Renaissance,
and particularly
with the founding Fathers of America.
And we know that Jefferson
had two, possibly three copies of Xenophon's
Life of Cyrus and referred to it regularly.”
“Run along until your Xerxes
he faces free men here, not slaves.”
Actually, slavery was frowned
upon under the Persians.
The Greek city states, on the other hand,
were built on slavery.
In fact,
these Spartan fighters would have each owned
their own slaves
who outnumbered Spartans by 7 to 1.
Fearing rebellion,
the Spartans would declare war on their slaves
annually, allowing them to be killed
with no legal repercussions.
And they would target slaves deemed strong
or likely to organize resistance.
As for freedom,
the only people who enjoyed democracy
in ancient Greece were slave owning men.
And Persian history went on long
after the Achemenid Empire.
“The frontal-view depictions of Parthian art
can be found in Christian artworks
of the Byzantium and  the Middle Ages,
a thousand years after this Empire's reign”
and continued to contribute to humanity.
Ibn Sina's
canon of medicine
shaped European medical education
for over six centuries.
Al-Farabi expanded Aristotelian logic,
laying groundwork for later
Christian and Jewish scholastic thought.
al-Khawarizmi invented algebra
Al-Biruni accurately
calculated the Earth's radius centuries
before Galileo. And there's many more.
These thinkers weren't peripheral.
They were pillars of science,
philosophy, math, medicine,
poetry, architecture, spirituality,
and their translated works
would become essential reading
during Europe's Renaissance.
“There is a huge cultural difference
between the Greeks and the Persians.
It's a struggle between freedom and slavery.”
History likes to paint in black and white,
West versus East, good versus evil.
But the truth is far more complex.
Civilizations have always exchanged ideas
borrowed from each other and built together.
Persia was a major part of that story.
“Multilingual teams labored on the huge
task of translating documents by Arabs,
Persians, and Greeks
as literally as possible from Arabic into Latin.
An intellectual golden age followed,
leading to the founding
of several universities during the Middle Ages.”
This isn't just about history.
It's about how history is weaponized.
Because that old story,
the West, as the guardian of liberty
and the East,
like Persia
as the eternal threat, is alive and well today.
And representing
the West
is its most recent 70 year old invention.
The settler colony called Israel.
“It's a map of a curse.
Iran's malignant arc”
“By standing up for your freedom
from an evil and oppressive regime.”
“God bless Israel and God bless America
Thank you very much.”
Athenian Greece was once
cast as the only democracy
in a sea of Persian tyranny.
Now it's Israel,
the only
democracy in the Middle East
against big, scary Iran.
“So it's a tiny country, tiny, surrounded
well, shall we say,
living in a very tough neighborhood.”
“Nuclear weapons.”
“Iran lied.”
Iran is still framed
as the looming irrational threat.
Even when it's Israel that launched the war.
“The people of Israel don't want this war.
There is one force
putting your family in grave danger
the tyrants of Tehran.”
Western civilization
defines itself by reason, liberty, freedom.
But these traditions were refined,
if not born in the East.
And the irony is ridiculous,
because from the birth of this myth
all the way until today,
the West has repeatedly undermined liberty
and freedom,
especially here.
So when the West tells you who they are
and who their enemies are
ask who wrote the story
and who got written out.